.. _iosys-module:

********************
Input/output systems
********************

Module usage
============

An input/output system is defined as a dynamical system that has a system
state as well as inputs and outputs (either inputs or states can be empty).
The dynamics of the system can be in continuous or discrete time.  To simulate
an input/output system, use the :func:`~control.input_output_response`
function::

  t, y = ct.input_output_response(io_sys, T, U, X0, params)

An input/output system can be linearized around an equilibrium point to obtain
a :class:`~control.StateSpace` linear system.  Use the
:func:`~control.find_eqpt` function to obtain an equilibrium point and the
:func:`~control.linearize` function to linearize about that equilibrium point::

  xeq, ueq = ct.find_eqpt(io_sys, X0, U0)
  ss_sys = ct.linearize(io_sys, xeq, ueq)

Input/output systems are automatically created for state space LTI systems
when using the :func:`ss` function.  Nonlinear input/output systems can be
created using the :class:`~control.NonlinearIOSystem` class, which requires
the definition of an update function (for the right hand side of the
differential or different equation) and an output function (computes the
outputs from the state)::

  io_sys = NonlinearIOSystem(updfcn, outfcn, inputs=M, outputs=P, states=N)

More complex input/output systems can be constructed by using the
:func:`~control.interconnect` function, which allows a collection of
input/output subsystems to be combined with internal connections
between the subsystems and a set of overall system inputs and outputs
that link to the subsystems::

    steering = ct.interconnect(
        [plant, controller], name='system',
        connections=[['controller.e', '-plant.y']],
        inplist=['controller.e'], inputs='r',
        outlist=['plant.y'], outputs='y')

Interconnected systems can also be created using block diagram manipulations
such as the :func:`~control.series`, :func:`~control.parallel`, and
:func:`~control.feedback` functions.  The :class:`~control.InputOutputSystem`
class also supports various algebraic operations such as `*` (series
interconnection) and `+` (parallel interconnection).

Example
=======

To illustrate the use of the input/output systems module, we create a
model for a predator/prey system, following the notation and parameter
values in FBS2e.

We begin by defining the dynamics of the system

.. code-block:: python

  import control as ct
  import numpy as np
  import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

  def predprey_rhs(t, x, u, params):
      # Parameter setup
      a = params.get('a', 3.2)
      b = params.get('b', 0.6)
      c = params.get('c', 50.)
      d = params.get('d', 0.56)
      k = params.get('k', 125)
      r = params.get('r', 1.6)
      
      # Map the states into local variable names
      H = x[0]
      L = x[1]

      # Compute the control action (only allow addition of food)
      u_0 = u if u > 0 else 0
  
      # Compute the discrete updates
      dH = (r + u_0) * H * (1 - H/k) - (a * H * L)/(c + H)
      dL = b * (a * H *  L)/(c + H) - d * L
  
      return [dH, dL]

We now create an input/output system using these dynamics:

.. code-block:: python

  io_predprey = ct.NonlinearIOSystem(
      predprey_rhs, None, inputs=('u'), outputs=('H', 'L'),
      states=('H', 'L'), name='predprey')

Note that since we have not specified an output function, the entire state
will be used as the output of the system.

The `io_predprey` system can now be simulated to obtain the open loop dynamics
of the system:

.. code-block:: python

  X0 = [25, 20]                 # Initial H, L
  T = np.linspace(0, 70, 500)   # Simulation 70 years of time
  
  # Simulate the system
  t, y = ct.input_output_response(io_predprey, T, 0, X0)
  
  # Plot the response
  plt.figure(1)
  plt.plot(t, y[0])
  plt.plot(t, y[1])
  plt.legend(['Hare', 'Lynx'])
  plt.show(block=False)

We can also create a feedback controller to stabilize a desired population of
the system.  We begin by finding the (unstable) equilibrium point for the
system and computing the linearization about that point.

.. code-block:: python

  eqpt = ct.find_eqpt(io_predprey, X0, 0)
  xeq = eqpt[0]                         # choose the nonzero equilibrium point
  lin_predprey = ct.linearize(io_predprey, xeq, 0)

We next compute a controller that stabilizes the equilibrium point using
eigenvalue placement and computing the feedforward gain using the number of
lynxes as the desired output (following FBS2e, Example 7.5):

.. code-block:: python

  K = ct.place(lin_predprey.A, lin_predprey.B, [-0.1, -0.2])
  A, B = lin_predprey.A, lin_predprey.B
  C = np.array([[0, 1]])                # regulated output = number of lynxes
  kf = -1/(C @ np.linalg.inv(A - B @ K) @ B)

To construct the control law, we build a simple input/output system that
applies a corrective input based on deviations from the equilibrium point.
This system has no dynamics, since it is a static (affine) map, and can
constructed using the `~control.ios.NonlinearIOSystem` class:

.. code-block:: python

  io_controller = ct.NonlinearIOSystem(
    None,
    lambda t, x, u, params: -K @ (u[1:] - xeq) + kf * (u[0] - xeq[1]),
    inputs=('Ld', 'u1', 'u2'), outputs=1, name='control')

The input to the controller is `u`, consisting of the vector of hare and lynx
populations followed by the desired lynx population.

To connect the controller to the predatory-prey model, we create an
:class:`~control.InterconnectedSystem` using the :func:`~control.interconnect`
function:

.. code-block:: python

  io_closed = ct.interconnect(
    [io_predprey, io_controller],	# systems
    connections=[
      ['predprey.u', 'control.y[0]'],
      ['control.u1',  'predprey.H'],
      ['control.u2',  'predprey.L']
    ],
    inplist=['control.Ld'],
    outlist=['predprey.H', 'predprey.L', 'control.y[0]']
  )
       
Finally, we simulate the closed loop system:

.. code-block:: python

  # Simulate the system
  t, y = ct.input_output_response(io_closed, T, 30, [15, 20])
  
  # Plot the response
  plt.figure(2)
  plt.subplot(2, 1, 1)
  plt.plot(t, y[0])
  plt.plot(t, y[1])
  plt.legend(['Hare', 'Lynx'])
  plt.subplot(2, 1, 2)
  plt.plot(t, y[2])
  plt.legend(['input'])
  plt.show(block=False)

Additional features
===================

The I/O systems module has a number of other features that can be used to
simplify the creation of interconnected input/output systems.

Summing junction
----------------

The :func:`~control.summing_junction` function can be used to create an
input/output system that takes the sum of an arbitrary number of inputs.  For
ezample, to create an input/output system that takes the sum of three inputs,
use the command

.. code-block:: python

  sumblk = ct.summing_junction(3)

By default, the name of the inputs will be of the form ``u[i]`` and the output
will be ``y``.  This can be changed by giving an explicit list of names::

  sumblk = ct.summing_junction(inputs=['a', 'b', 'c'], output='d')

A more typical usage would be to define an input/output system that compares a
reference signal to the output of the process and computes the error::

  sumblk = ct.summing_junction(inputs=['r', '-y'], output='e')

Note the use of the minus sign as a means of setting the sign of the input 'y'
to be negative instead of positive.

It is also possible to define "vector" summing blocks that take
multi-dimensional inputs and produce a multi-dimensional output.  For example,
the command

.. code-block:: python

  sumblk = ct.summing_junction(inputs=['r', '-y'], output='e', dimension=2)

will produce an input/output block that implements ``e[0] = r[0] - y[0]`` and
``e[1] = r[1] - y[1]``.

Automatic connections using signal names
----------------------------------------

The :func:`~control.interconnect` function allows the interconnection of
multiple systems by using signal names of the form ``sys.signal``.  In many
situations, it can be cumbersome to explicitly connect all of the appropriate
inputs and outputs.  As an alternative, if the ``connections`` keyword is
omitted, the :func:`~control.interconnect` function will connect all signals
of the same name to each other.  This can allow for simplified methods of
interconnecting systems, especially when combined with the
:func:`~control.summing_junction` function.  For example, the following code
will create a unity gain, negative feedback system::

  P = ct.tf2io([1], [1, 0], inputs='u', outputs='y')
  C = ct.tf2io([10], [1, 1], inputs='e', outputs='u')
  sumblk = ct.summing_junction(inputs=['r', '-y'], output='e')
  T = ct.interconnect([P, C, sumblk], inplist='r', outlist='y')

If a signal name appears in multiple outputs then that signal will be summed
when it is interconnected.  Similarly, if a signal name appears in multiple
inputs then all systems using that signal name will receive the same input.
The :func:`~control.interconnect` function will generate an error if an signal
listed in ``inplist`` or ``outlist`` (corresponding to the inputs and outputs
of the interconnected system) is not found, but inputs and outputs of
individual systems that are not connected to other systems are left
unconnected (so be careful!).


Module classes and functions
============================

.. autosummary::
   :toctree: generated/
   :template: custom-class-template.rst

   ~control.InputOutputSystem
   ~control.InterconnectedSystem
   ~control.LinearICSystem
   ~control.LinearIOSystem
   ~control.NonlinearIOSystem

.. autosummary::
   :toctree: generated/

   ~control.find_eqpt
   ~control.linearize
   ~control.input_output_response
   ~control.interconnect
   ~control.ss2io
   ~control.summing_junction
   ~control.tf2io
